Background
----------

**Summary and motivation**

The Human Genome Project brought the world together to discover our shared genetic heritage and lay the groundwork for a revolution in medicine. To complete the mission, we must now also share the billions of changes to our genome occurring during our lives that so often lead to cancer. The public Cancer Gene Trust will gather these “somatic mutations” from routine clinical practice, the only such data source operating at a large enough scale to unveil the true complexity of cancer, and make them openly available for research. Its building blocks are (1) global sharing of somatic mutations observed during precision clinical practice through an open public resource, (2) linkage of this information with secure repositories of rich clinical and genetic records accessible by qualified researchers, and (3) the cultivation and support of hundreds of private- and public-sector application programs that navigate this information into the service of cancer treatment and research. 

**Outline**

*The numbers*: There are 1.2 million cancer cases per year in the United States. If 1 out of 3 of these resulted in a donation of genetic test information to the public Cancer Gene Trust, and 1 out of 30 resulted in deep family genetic sequencing data donated to a trusted repository, then after 5 years we would have 2 million test records in the public Cancer Gene Trust and 200,000 full genome and clinical profile records in trusted repositories.

*The structure*: Through this effort, every cancer patient-participant’s tumor mutation tests will be added to a public Cancer Gene Trust. For those 'full-scale' participants whose family genomes are sequenced as well as their tumors, such as members of the Precision Medicine Initiative cohort, deep genetic and clinical information will be kept available in trusted repositories for use by qualified researchers. These would include the NCI’s Genome Data Commons and together form a larger federated data commons, e.g. as suggested by the NIH Big Data to Knowledge project. To incentivize data donations, each patient-participant who donates their tumor mutation data to the public Cancer Gene Trust could, for example, be allowed to designate 10 “Moonshot Bucks” to the charity of their choice, or each participant could also get annual notification as to how many times their data were used, giving them the satisfaction of knowing how their donation helped defeat cancer.

On-ramps for data donation could be established at a number of levels, from local community and advocate-driven efforts to national programs. For example, patient-participant data could be entered into the public Cancer Gene Trust via an extension of current programs conducted by cancer registries accredited by the National Cancer Registry Association. Medical centers and testing companies could work with trusted repositories to create appropriate stewardship of data, particularly from 'full-scale' patient-participants. In other countries, national health services could play an analogous data stewardship role for full-scale data.

*The link to care*: Because a trusted repository steward will collect and maintain personal information about the patient-participant as well as genetic and clinical test information, they will provide an essential secure link between researchers and participants. This would allow, for example, researchers to contact a participant who has a specific rare mutation they found in the public Cancer Gene Trust to invite them to be enrolled in a clinical trial, or to obtain further information about the participant’s genetic make-up or clinical history beyond what is available in the public Cancer Gene Trust, when the participant has consented to this.

Partnering with the Global Alliance for Genomics and Health, this resource would then be globally networked, increasing the number of test records in the public Cancer Gene Trust by an order of magnitude. Such a resource would enable a revolution in the understanding and treatment of cancer.

**Cost**

The overall costs to create the infrastructure are an estimated $35M in engineering and $5M in administration. To incentivize the donation of 2 million tumor mutation profiles to the public Cancer Gene Trust with Moonshot Bucks would require that an additional $20M be raised by philanthropy for donation to participant-chosen charities; a similar amount could be sought to incentivize donation of full-scale data on 200,000 participants to a trusted repository. This $40M in philanthropy would match the $40M in federal money dedicated to the infrastructure. A larger global Cancer Gene Trust could be built with additional matching funds from non-US sources. Once the system is in place it would be self-sustaining in perpetuity by simply converting the incentives into payer-contributed support costs associated with routine genetic testing or into fees paid by users of the infrastructure. In summary, the total US cost for a self-sustaining system is $80M over 5 years, possibly from a mix of philanthropy and federal support.

**Conclusion**

How do we defeat a disease that appears in billions of different guises? The same way we tackled the problem of sequencing a genome of billions of DNA bases: we work together. Together we can uncover cancer in all its different molecular forms, no longer letting the precious genetic and clinical information from countless personal battles slip through our fingers, never to inform the battles of others to come.  Cancer patients desperately want their struggles to mean something, to make a difference to others. This way they will. Through the Cancer Gene Trust, patient-participants can unite to uncover and make readily available for research and treatment decisions the essentially complete molecular character of cancer at an enormous scale.  It is time to do this. 
